Conda + Conda-Build + Conda-Libmamba-Solver May 2023 Release Blog Post (#139)
conda-incubator/conda-dot-org: blog/2023-05-31-may-releases.md

---
title: "May Releases for Conda, Conda-Build, and Conda-Libmamba-Solver"
slug: "2023-05-31-may-2023-releases"
description: |
    Conda 23.5.0, conda-build 3.25.0, and conda-libmamba-solver 23.5.0 have been released! 🎉
authors: [beeankha]
tags: [announcement, conda, conda-build, conda-libmamba-solver]
image: img/blog/2023-05-31-may-releases/tada.jpg

---

May releases are here! 🎉 Both conda 23.5.0 and conda-build 3.25.0 are now available on both main and conda-forge:

## [Changes in Conda](https://github.com/conda/conda/releases/tag/23.5.0)

To update conda, run:
```bash
conda install -n base conda=23.5.0
```

### ✨ What's New? ✨

The long-awaited [`conda doctor` subcommand plugin](https://conda.org/blog/2023-05-11-conda-doctor/) has been implemented! The [related conda issue is over nine years old](https://github.com/conda/conda/issues/474) and has been a regularly requested feature. The `conda doctor` command enables conda users to detect any packages with files missing (i.e., corrupt packages) in their conda environment.

<!-- truncate -->

Additionally, the following features and changes can be found in conda 23.5.0:

> * `conda list --reverse` is a new command which returns a reversed list of installed packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `conda list --reverse` is a new option for the `conda list` command which returns a reversed list of installed packages.
```

This isn't a new command. It's new option to configure its output.

* Folks who have [signature verification](https://www.anaconda.com/blog/conda-signature-verification) enabled will get warnings instead of an `info`-level message about misconfiguration.
* More functional tests have been added around conda's content trust code.
* For our build system, we switched from `setup.py` to `pyproject.toml` and use [Hatchling](https://pypi.org/project/hatchling/).
* [Which Python modules get imported during `conda activate` calls are now optimized for speed.](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12550)
* The `conda_cli` fixture has been added in order to replace `conda.testing.helpers.run_inprocess_conda_command` and `conda.testing.integration.run_command`.

> * The `tmp_env` fixture has been added in order to replace `conda.testing.integration.make_temp_env`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `tmp_env` pytest fixture has been added in order to replace `conda.testing.integration.make_temp_env`.
```

* The `path_factory` fixture has been added to replace custom prefix logic like `conda.testing.integration._get_temp_prefix` and `conda.testing.integration.make_temp_prefix`.

> * The way that the `Activator` classes are defined in `conda/activate.py` has been refactored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All three of the above pytest fixtures have been documented in the article [Integration Tests](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/stable/dev-guide/writing-tests/integration-tests.html).
* The way that the `Activator` classes are defined in `conda/activate.py` has been refactored.
```

* The index cache metadata file `.state.json` was renamed to `.info.json` to track [draft Repodata Metadata `.info.json` CEP](https://github.com/conda-incubator/ceps/pull/48).
* Improved cache locking and logging when using `jlap`.

> * The repo's README example has changed from IPython Notebook and NumPy to PyTorch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The project's README example has changed from IPython Notebook and NumPy to PyTorch.
```

> * Retry language in flexible solve and `repodata` logs are now less ominous.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Retry language in flexible solve and `repodata` logs are now more user friendly.
```

lol, ominous is a great word, but maybe my suggestion is a little better 😄.

* Python 3.11 is now supported.

### 🔧 What Got Fixed? 🔧

> The following bug fixes were implemented into the 23.5.0 version of conda:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following bug fixes were implemented in the 23.5.0 version of conda:
```

> * `conda clean` no longer fails if we failed to get the file stats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `conda clean` no longer fails if it was unable to get the file stats.
```

Probably better to use the passive voice here.

* If `conda.deprecations.DeprecationHandler` receives a bad version, a fallback version is provided.
* The default value for `defaults` includes `msys2` when `context.subdir` is `win-*` on non-Windows platforms.
* `TypeError`s are avoided when non-string types are written to the index cache metadata.
* `conda.core.package_cache_data.UrlsData.get_url` no longer fails when `package_path` has a `.conda` extension.

> * No more pre-converting of paths to Unix style on Windows in `conda.sh`; this is so that they are prefix-replaceable upon installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* No more pre-converting of paths to Unix style on Windows in `conda.sh`; this done to make them prefix-replaceable upon installation.
```

* [`conda_env.pip_util.installed`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12492)
* [`conda_env.pip_util._canonicalize_name`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12492)
* [`conda_env.pip_util.add_pip_installed`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12492)
* [`conda_env.env.load_from_directory`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12492)
* [`python -m conda_env.cli.main`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12492) (use `conda env` instead)
* [`python -m conda_env`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12492) (use `conda env` instead)
* [`conda.auxlib.packaging`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12509)
* [`conda.testing.integration.get_conda_list_tuple`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12676) (use `conda.core.prefix_data.PrefixData().get()` instead)
* [`conda.testing.encode_for_env_var`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12677)
* [`conda.testing.integration.temp_chdir`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12678) (use `monkeypatch.chdir` instead)

* * *

## [Changes in Conda-Build](https://github.com/conda/conda-build/releases/tag/3.25.0)

To update conda-build, run:
```bash
conda install -n base conda-build=3.25.0
```

### ✨ What's New? ✨

> In the latest version of conda-build, noarch packages that use virtual packages can now have them added to the hash contents of the package. This facilitates the building of noarch packages multiple times for different platforms with platform-specific dependencies. In conda-build 3.25.0, different variants can be built for `__linux`/`__osx`/`__win` and get non-clashing package file names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the latest version of conda-build, noarch packages that use virtual packages can now be added to the hash contents of a package. This facilitates the building of noarch packages multiple times for different platforms with platform-specific dependencies. In conda-build 3.25.0, different variants can be built for `__linux`, `__osx`,  or `__win` and get non-clashing package file names.
```

Additionally, the following features and changes can be found in conda-build 3.25.0:

* Support for `svn` source credentials (`svn_username` and `svn_password`).
* Standalone `conda-index` is now utilized instead of bundled indexing code.
* For our build system, we switched from `setup.py` to `pyproject.toml` and use [Hatchling](https://pypi.org/project/hatchling/).
* Minor code simplification for `conda_build.index.ChannelIndex._ensuredirs`.
* `xattr` test is enabled on MacOS.
* Python 3.11 is now supported.

### 🔧 What Got Fixed? 🔧

> The following bug fixes were implemented into the 3.25.0 version of conda-build:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following bug fixes were implemented in the 3.25.0 version of conda-build:
```

### 🌅 What's Marked for [Deprecation](https://github.com/conda-incubator/ceps/blob/main/cep-9.md)? 🌅

* [Inline `conda index` logic](https://github.com/conda/conda-build/pull/4828) (`conda-build` still provides `conda-index` a.k.a. `conda index` CLI, but uses standalone `conda-index` during builds).
* Prefer the [standalone conda-index package](https://conda.github.io/conda-index/), instead of `conda-build index` or `conda index`, to use faster indexing code.
* [`conda_build.metadata.ns_cfg`](https://github.com/conda/conda-build/pull/4837) (use `conda_build.get_selectors.get_selectors` instead). (#4837)
* [`conda_build.config.python2_fs_encode`](https://github.com/conda/conda-build/pull/4843)
* [`conda_build.config._ensure_dir`](https://github.com/conda/conda-build/pull/4843) (use `stdlib`'s `pathlib.Path.mkdir(exist_ok=True)` or `os.makedirs(exist_ok=True)` instead).

* * *

## [Changes in Conda-Libmamba-Solver](https://github.com/conda/conda-libmamba-solver/releases/tag/23.5.0)

To update conda-libmamba-solver, run:
```bash
conda install -n base conda-libmamba-solver=23.5.0
```

### ✨ What's New? ✨

> Amongst other improvements and bug fixes, the newest version of the conda-libmamba-solver provides a `CONDA_LIBMAMBA_SOLVER_NO_CHANNELS_FROM_INSTALLED` environment variable to prevent channels from being injected from installed packages, which is useful for air-gapped environments where outside channels are not available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Amongst other improvements and bug fixes, the latest version of the conda-libmamba-solver provides a `CONDA_LIBMAMBA_SOLVER_NO_CHANNELS_FROM_INSTALLED` environment variable to prevent channels from being injected from installed packages, which is useful for air-gapped environments where external channel servers are not reachable.
```

Additionally, the following features and changes can be found in conda-libmamba-solver 23.5.0:

* Simplify `libmambapy.Context` initialization so that we only set the parts that we use.
* Use the new `RepoInterface` and remove the `SubdirData` subclass workarounds, which requires conda 23.5.0.
* Known solver behavior differences are now documented.
* Development docs have been updated to reflect changes in build system and other inaccuracies.
* Tests reproducing the known solver differences were added.
* Some tests on `libmamba` 1.4.2 are now skipped temporarily to workaround some test failures.

### 🔧 What Got Fixed? 🔧

> The following bug fixes were implemented into the 23.5.0 version of conda-libmamba-solver:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following bug fixes were implemented in the 23.5.0 version of conda-libmamba-solver:
```

---
title: "May Releases for Conda, Conda-Build, and Conda-Libmamba-Solver"
slug: "2023-05-31-may-2023-releases"
description: |
    Conda 23.5.0, conda-build 3.25.0, and conda-libmamba-solver 23.5.0 have been released! 🎉
authors: [beeankha]
tags: [announcement, conda, conda-build, conda-libmamba-solver]
image: img/blog/2023-05-31-may-releases/tada.jpg

---

> May releases are here! 🎉 Both conda 23.5.0 and conda-build 3.25.0 are now available on both main and conda-forge:

Reviewer 2: And conda-libmamba-solver?

> May releases are here! 🎉 Both conda 23.5.0 and conda-build 3.25.0 are now available on both main and conda-forge:

Author: ```suggestion
May releases are here! 🎉 Conda 23.5.0, conda-build 3.25.0, and conda-libmamba-solver 23.5.0 are now available on both main and conda-forge:
```

* [`python -m conda_env`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12492) (use `conda env` instead)
* [`conda.auxlib.packaging`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12509)
* [`conda.testing.integration.get_conda_list_tuple`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12676) (use `conda.core.prefix_data.PrefixData().get()` instead)
* [`conda.testing.encode_for_env_var`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12677)
* [`conda.testing.integration.temp_chdir`](https://github.com/conda/conda/pull/12678) (use `monkeypatch.chdir` instead)

* * *

## [Changes in Conda-Build](https://github.com/conda/conda-build/releases/tag/3.25.0)

To update conda-build, run:
```bash
conda install -n base conda-build=3.25.0
```

### ✨ What's New? ✨

In the latest version of conda-build, noarch packages that use virtual packages can now have them added to the hash contents of the package. This facilitates the building of noarch packages multiple times for different platforms with platform-specific dependencies. In conda-build 3.25.0, different variants can be built for `__linux`/`__osx`/`__win` and get non-clashing package file names.

Additionally, the following features and changes can be found in conda-build 3.25.0:

> * Support for `svn` source credentials (`svn_username` and `svn_password`).

Reviewer 2: Link to the updated docs: https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda-build/en/3.25.x/resources/define-metadata.html#source-from-svn

> * Support for `svn` source credentials (`svn_username` and `svn_password`).

Author: ```suggestion
* Support for [`svn` source credentials](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda-build/en/3.25.x/resources/define-metadata.html#source-from-svn) (`svn_username` and `svn_password`).
```
